Chapter 8: We’re Missing a Moral Framework of Justice in Artificial Intelligence: On the Limits, Failings, and Ethics of Fairness
2018: The Year of the Techlash
In 2018, news coverage of Cambridge Analytica’s exploitation and manipulation of Facebook data and its role in undermining democratic electoral politics in the United States and United Kingdom seemingly ushered in a new era of mainstream critical coverage about the overreach of technical systems into the everyday lives of citizens, consumers, and voters. Even though critical academic and journalistic inquiry into algorithmic bias and discrimination had been documented for well over two decades or more by scholars of color and LGBTQ+ and nontraditional scholars, as part of a larger community of critical theorists of the internet, the stories of the year centered around mounting examples and evidence of Facebook’s pervasive power and invasions of consumer privacy, Google’s failure to address regulators’ concerns and monopoly control in search, and public concern over the use and disparate risks and harms of AI and emerging technologies. Examples of the failures and risky applications of AI tools included facial recognition systems by militaries and law enforcement organizations, criminal sentencing algorithms within the U.S. legal system, and autonomous vehicles disproportionately trained to identify white (vs. nonwhite) bodies as pedestrians. The volume and salience of these negative and investigative inquiries into the operations and impacts of Silicon Valley technology giants even led The Financial Times to include “techlash” within their “Word of the Year” series in 2018 (as shown in Figure 8.1).
As a result of the “techlash” and increasing calls for greater scrutiny toward the concentrated power and harmful impacts of global technology giants, critical discourse about digital technologies—and their corporate actors, enactors, and logics—have become common responses to counteract the celebratory marketing rhetoric and pitches regarding the promises and potential of technologies and data-driven systems. Even new methods and approaches of researching these phenomena have been developed, such as Andre Brock’s critical technocultural discourse analysis (CTDA), to address the lack of methods to study technological practices that intersect with race, class, and power. Indeed, stories and studies about the harms and risks of digital technologies and algorithmic bias have become so common that multinational technology corporations and brands such as Facebook, Google, YouTube, Microsoft, Amazon, and IBM have attempted themselves to ameliorate their tarnished images and redress the growing distrust in their commercial platforms and automated systems through public relations campaigns and promotional materials about their efforts to be more “ethical,” “fair,” and “transparent” in their uses and applications of big data.
Compared to previous corporate attempts to obfuscate, ignore, and pivot claims about the risks and harms of their systems, technology corporations are now acknowledging the presence (but not gravity) of these issues while investing billions of dollars into research and intervention programs that seek to operationalize and create “fair” and “transparent” algorithms as a key type of intervention in an increasingly data-driven society. By and large, the emphasis on fairness interventions in AI seeks to effect and propagate technical systems that are neutral and objective and do not render any specific groups as advantaged over others. Meanwhile, transparency and accountability interventions aim to put into effect systems and protocols for auditing and regulating such systems unto these goals, often calling for and relying upon internal regulatory bodies within technology corporations for such measures. Of course, one key challenge for state actors and regulators is that they cannot legislate what they cannot see and understand, and so transparency is a key dimension of enacting regulation. However, the goal of many ethics responses  remains largely techno-centric, in that the goal is to perfect or “unbias” the technology, rather than account for the asymmetrical power relationships and gravity of history that renders the development and deployment of such projects deeply uneven, unethical, and even immoral.
Moreover, data trusts and research partnerships between universities, policy think tanks, and technology corporations have been established and revamped as a go-to strategy for effecting a more democratic and inclusive mediated society, again calling for fairness, accountability, and transparency (FAT) as key ideals within the future of AI, yet often leaving and ignoring notions of intersectional power relations out of their ethical imaginaries and frameworks. As a point of departure, many are invested in linking conversations about ethics to the moral genesis and failures caused by structural racism, sexism, capitalism, and the fostering of inequality, with an eye toward understanding how the digital is implicated in social, political, and economic systems that buttress systemic failures. Complicating these conversations are concerns about neocolonial technology supply chains and the total integration of the digital into global economic systems.
By 2019, a year after the “techlash,” high-prole academic and corporate organizational responses to ethical issues associated with artificial intelligence were well underway. In all, technology companies, philanthropic foundations, and universities and university researchers have attempted to respond to the information “crisis” and distrust in biased commercial data platforms by investing billions of dollars into academic and industry research projects that proffer “fairer” and more “ethical” and “transparent” approaches to designing, deploying, and embedding algorithmic and artificial intelligence systems within multiple facets of everyday life. However, the current and dominant frames of fairness within these and related “ethical” AI interventions often fail to consider and integrate notions and issues of structural and systemic inequality and power within their imaginaries and conceptualizations of the moral and ethical dimensions of AI and AI systems. Namely, radical scholars, writers, and activists, largely within and from marginalized communities and identity groups (e.g., women of color, queer scholars, scholars of color, and critical scholars) have pushed for power analyses of the ways in which algorithmic systems operate and disparately impact communities, opening the door for the “techlash” conversation. That said, their concerns about algorithmic bias, discrimination, and digital redlining have sometimes been diminished and co-opted by those in power—that is, the originators and institutions that invested in, designed, and deployed the technical systems in question. Put another way, such influential actors have steered fairness interventions to focus on: (1) the more technical—versus sociotechnical—approaches to understanding the implications of AI; and (2) the current state of affairs and technologies—versus, first, their historic analogs and important structural factors that influence their deployment and, secondly, the future and long-term consequences, risks, and harms of these applications and their development. Consequently, fairness in AI interventions, at their best, obfuscate and, at their worst, ignore the—historically, socially, and culturally— unequal contexts and power relations into which these computational tools and ideologies are attempting to embed, intervene, and operate.
That being said, a variety of responses to this dearth of critical AI inquiry have included the organizing of academics and tech workers in response to unjust uses of AI, from military uses to protests of facial recognition software, to protesting the organization of AI advisory boards that include openly transphobic members. In the United States, United Kingdom, and Europe, newly formed critical internet studies centers have formed to organize key scholars around the world, proffering greater calls for using an intersectional and structural power analysis to AI and AI tools that foreground issues of race and racism; gender, sexism and patriarchy; and class-labor surveillance and exploitation. Altogether, emanating from these and related scholars, activists, and scholar-activists are calls for expanding the framework of ethical AI from focusing on the tweaking of algorithms and datasets to encompassing a broader comprehensive inquiry into the design, use, and profit-making processes of AI and the internet, especially in relation to the social contexts and power relations in which they are deployed and proliferating.
In this chapter, we conduct a critical appraisal and power analysis of the present state of AI and fairness research and interventions, and their philosophical and historical antecedents, extrapolating whether and how such projects seek to pave the way for an inclusive and more democratic data-driven future. In particular, we discuss the extant state of AI and fairness research, given its proclivity for importing radical critiques and terminology of algorithmic bias and discrimination while reducing and obfuscating the core concerns of these critiques in efforts to find a “silver bullet” intervention for a universalized notion of impacted stakeholders, which are often dependent upon funding from, and in cooperation with, the technology giants that have promulgated these issues and concerns. By historicizing and contextualizing the discussion of fairness in AI in relation to previous writings about ethics and power, largely drawing from marginalized and critical technology scholars, we seek to demonstrate and elucidate how returning to their writings and key arguments can usher in—and push for—a moral framework of justice for artificial intelligence that deeply considers and engages with the underlying concerns and critiques about power and inequality within extant and emerging critiques of AI. At its core, this chapter surveys and addresses:
1. What are the philosophical antecedents to how ethics is discussed, and how should this be reimagined into a moral framework of justice?
2. How are the most high-prole and resourced AI interventions defining and conceptualizing algorithmic “ethics” and “fairness” interventions?
3. If the corporations and institutions that accelerated and propagated algorithmic bias and discrimination are at the helm of these resourced AI interventions, to what extent can and will issues of algorithmic oppression, discrimination, and redlining be addressed?
4. To what extent has—and will—the concerns and experiences of oppressed peoples and communities be prioritized within discussions about the design, deployment, and daily use of biased and discriminatory AI systems?
Indeed, we hope to demonstrate and articulate how artificial intelligence and automated systems are, undoubtedly, neither neutral nor objective, and neither fair nor balanced within an unequal society, and argue for ways to change this. While these claims are common within elds such as ethnic studies, gender studies, queer studies, science and technology studies, media studies, critical cultural communication, and critical information studies, and critical digital humanities, these ideas and concepts are less dominant or common within more technical conversations about AI within the elds and disciplines of computer science, human-computer interaction, and technology policy. Furthermore, we strive to disentangle the ways in which current and emerging fairness interventions in AI are premised upon such radical critiques of technology’s impact in society whilst shifting and distilling these critiques into both conservative and neoliberal ideologies for change. In all, our chapter will unearth the importance of, and push for, broader approaches to AI interventions, rather than naive and reductionist technical solutions of “fair” and “ethical” algorithms, which seek to deflect and disregard the key claims of emerging and radical critiques of technology.
On the Origins of Ethics and Ethics Reimagined as Justice
A careful critical analysis of political philosophy is in order to understand the origin stories of ethics, especially as it has been framed in relation to AI. Rueben Binns has written an important review of the literature where he examines the Enlightenment-era philosophical antecedents concerned with discrimination, egalitarianism, and justice as matters of moral and political philosophy. In the article, Binns argues that contemporary issues of fairness and ethics in machine learning and artificial intelligence are increasingly formalized around these preexisting frameworks, and they provide an important guide to understanding and critiquing the limitations of Western political philosophy. Rarely are the origins of the philosophical antecedents to contemporary conversations about ethics brought into relief, so here we also point to one of the most important critics of the limits of Western liberalism and Enlightenment philosophies of ethics: Charles Mills, whose work is essential for those working on reconceptualizing justice and fairness as a matter of radically reimagining social structure, not limited solely to individualistic moral virtuosity. In short, traditional Western liberalism has been foundational to concepts of emancipation, albeit, with many shortfalls, and Mills’ work denotes the centrality of exclusion in liberalism’s core documents and declarations. He writes:
Rejecting liberalism’s classically individualistic social ontology for an ontology of class and gender, challenging its cramped schedule of rights for a normative empowerment of the class- and gender-subordinated, these political projects [of liberalism] arm a more expansive vision that would take us beyond bourgeois liberalism … and patriarchal liberalism.
Mills’ argument, not unlike critical theorist of the internet, Jessie Daniels, notes the parasitic ways that liberalism can “encompass both overtly racist liberalism, where people of color are explicitly conceptualized as racial inferiors, and the no longer overtly racist, ‘color-blind’ liberalism of today. In the later variety of liberalism, illicit white racial advantage is still being secured, but now primarily through the evasions in the theory’s key assumptions rather than the derogation of nonwhites.” Daniels, in particular, as a scholar of white racism and the internet, also rejects mainstream liberalism, particularly neoliberal white feminism, as a means of upending white supremacist logics in Silicon Valley, in their products, platforms, and projects. What these works point to, and elaborate on, are the shortcomings and limitations of classic liberalism as a moral framework for thinking about ethics in AI because of its failure to fully capture the ways in which technologies are undeniably tied to, and embedded with, power. Therefore, such frameworks of ethics inherently fail to address the complexity and dynamism of systems, processes, and actors that seek to reproduce and maintain power and maintain hegemony while evading detection, particularly in its racialized forms and formations.
This brings us to a more recent series of interrogations of power, AI, and ethics. To begin, Anna Lauren Homan’s critique of fairness and antidiscrimination efforts within AI elucidates how technical attempts to isolate and remove “bad data” and “bad algorithms” will inherently fail to effect justice and address the needs and concerns of skeptics and critics of AI. Drawing from an analysis of the ways in which fairness interventions tend to overemphasize “bad actors” and center single-axis (vis-à-vis intersectional or broader sociotechnical) thinking, Homan concludes: “At best, we will end up with little more than a set of reactionary technical solutions that ultimately fail to displace the underlying logic that produce unjust hierarchies of better and worse o subjects in the first place.” This is because, by orienting interventions around such bad actors and centering single-axis paradigms, techno-interventions cast aside larger concerns of injustice, inequity, and discrimination for more solvable fixes, underscoring the limitations of centering the technology as a site for imagining ethics. Adding to this, Ruha Benjamin unpacks the concept of the “New Jim Code,” a term she develops in dialogue with Michelle Alexander’s concept of the “New Jim Crow.” While Alexander articulates how the New Jim Crow operates throughout and within the U.S. criminal justice system to reinforce and reproduce the racialized oppression and social control of black communities in the United States, Benjamin incorporates these critical race theory frameworks and concepts to examine and illustrate the ways in which digital technologies are integrated, and enmeshed within, digitally mediated systems and processes of surveillance, exploitation, and control while producing new forms of digital discrimination and oppression. 
These articulations of the structures of white supremacy and capitalism as overdeterminants of the disparate effects of technology reframe the debates that are often essentializing, techno-deterministic, and techno-centric—foregrounding imagined digital spaces of neutrality and objectivity, which are divorced from the broader social, political, and economic contexts in which these technologies are developed and deployed. While we specifically examine and problematize power as it is tied to racial identity, such marginalization and discrimination also occur on other axes, such as sexual orientation, gender, and ability. Moreover, here we point back to the work of Mills and his elaboration of “principles of corrective justice,” which he says must account for the unequal, exploitative, and stigmatizing historical and contemporary effects of racism, to which many other -isms might be incorporated. We concur and offer that the sites of intervention into the concerns of the digital must be grounded in, and informed by, frameworks that acknowledge and account for the many histories of power and oppression upon which technologies are deployed rather than assuming neutral and level playing elds undergirded by techno utopianism. To aid in furthering understanding the power hierarchies and power relations of the internet, we point readers to important researchers, and the evidence and theory and concept building they have provided, which we list at the end of this chapter.
Academic and Corporate Responses to the Techlash: A Critique
There have been many recent calls for ethics to enter mainstream academic and popular journalistic studies of the internet and digital technologies, and we note that this is an important moment to frame the guiding logics of these calls. We see much of this work as additive, as if ethics were a supplemental module of learning that could be tacked on to the deeply embedded ways in which computing and information communication technologies are already conceptualized. Indeed, in the United States, the National Science Foundatio, (NSF) has produced calls for proposals to do things like improve undergraduate computer science education where ethics is an optional addition, but not fundamental or required for proposal funding. Large funding bodies for academic research are certainly barometers of what is most important, and these too, serve as a litmus test of the terms upon which scholars are tied to the making of different sorts of interventions. Similarly, the launch of four different multimillion and billion dollar research grants and programs in 2018 and 2019, at and within universities and industry research and development units based in the United States, have largely been driven by calls for “ethical” AI. We note that among the most visible of these are: (1) the MIT Schwarzman College of Computing, (2) the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, (3) Google’s AI ethics advisory council (announced in April 2019 and disbanded a week later), and (4) a joint NSF-Amazon research grant. Singularly and collectively, these research initiatives demonstrate the seeming importance and amount of resources being diverted to address pressing questions in light of the techlash, especially as they relate to issues of algorithmic bias, inequality, and discrimination within an increasingly data-driven society, and whereby digital tools are being deployed and embedded within multiple facets of everyday life. 
Firstly, one noteworthy dimension of these projects is that the principal donors of university research funds were often the venture capitalists and technology corporate giants who had been the targets of intensified scrutiny; and the principal recipients were the same premiere computing institutions (i.e., MIT and Stanford) largely esteemed for training the top computer scientists in charge of designing and coding these systems. Indeed, the same institutions at the helm of AI interventions were also laboratories that bolstered the root causes, actors, and investors that had led to the “techlash.” Those who served to benefit the most from the propagation of “fairer” systems and systems designs, in order to perpetuate the existence of these systems in the first place, at the risk losing their revenue streams entirely, were in charge of defining the terms of ethics and fairness in technology. 
Moreover, taken as case studies for the dominant ideologies and frameworks of AI interventions, these initiatives demonstrate the gap of understanding, within both the academy and technology corporations, regarding the origins and implications of issues of algorithmic discrimination—and broader issues of social, political, and economic oppression, and in generating productive, effective interventions that adequately address the core concerns of critical scholars, activists, and organizers. For example, within the introductory narratives and launches of each of these centers, programs, and partnerships, it was apparent that these interventions were deeply premised and rooted in conservative and neoliberal logics for solutions, not the radical and critical frameworks that originally paved the way for discussions about the disparate and disparaging impacts of artificial intelligence systems. Considering the values and ethics of the radical scholars, activists, and organizers who paved the way for discussions about AI ethics and AI as not neutral, it was questionable whether and how such initiatives would address the core problems and concerns about data harms and risks if their radical critiques were not considered, valued, or at least voiced within advisory board meetings and the initial conceptions of intervention projects. A detailed critique of each initiative and their collective discourses is detailed in the following.
Overview of Academic AI Interventions
First, in October 2018, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) announced their plans for a $1 billion commitment to “world-changing breakthroughs and ethical implications” of computing and artificial intelligence, including the establishment of the MIT Schwarzman College of Computing through a large gift from Stephen A. Schwarzman, CEO and co-founder of Blackstone. Largely absent within this origin story of MIT’s “world-changing” and ethical institution was the acknowledgment that the new college was being primarily funded by the world’s largest private equity rm, which had been publicly identified and criticized by the United Nations for its exacerbation and exploitation of the affordable housing crisis in the United States. Aimed at being an interdisciplinary hub for innovation and democratic research, it remains to be seen whether and how this new MIT College will lead to more redistributive and restorative impacts to society through its research program, particularly considering its deep ties to extractive and exploitative corporations, industries, and partners. 
In a similar but distinct case of the contradictory statements and values of AI ethics centers, when Stanford announced their Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI), there was scrutiny and skepticism toward Stanford University’s attempt to establish this center that might ameliorate issues of algorithmic bias and discrimination while being led and advised by a cadre of the powerful stakeholders who had created the problem in the first place. Namely, while Co-Director Fei-Fei Li spoke of the institute’s goals of “building a better future for all of humanity” and acknowledged the need for the “creators of AI to be representative of humanity” within both the press conference events and related promotional materials, the institute’s website did not display nor reflect such values when it failed to list any Black or African American faculty members or advisers. The institute was criticized for a nonrepresentative, tone-deaf announcement about its “ethical AI” research center, especially considering how it did not center and integrate researchers and activists from, or tied to, marginalized communities and groups. (See Figure 8.2 for sample critique.)
Additionally, the Stanford institute garnered critique for its launch event, which included advisers such as former U.S. National Security Adviser and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, who has been greatly critiqued for his role in allegedly conducting war crimes on behalf of the United States in various countries, including Vietnam, Bangladesh, and Chile, to name a few. Not unlike the role of Schwarzman in the MIT initiative, Kissinger symbolizes an oppositional stance in his business and professional dealings to what many regard as central to framing ethics as matters germane to civil and human rights, making such personalities even more controversial given their roles in allegedly eroding democratic social values. Generally, it appeared that this institute, while incorporating language about innovating for a better, more ethical and diverse future of AI, was reproducing and profiteering from many of the same hegemonic narratives and ideologies that had produced biased and discriminatory AI systems within an immensely unequal postcapitalist society. Again, considering the concerns, experiences, and organizing activities of marginalized communities, activists, and advocates, which led to the perceived need for more ethical AI, the success of such initiatives seems questionable given that those most affected and penalized by such systems were not invited for their expertise or input, symbolizing the tone-deaf nature of such centers, or their shallow engagement with the core concerns and critiques.
Thus, drawing from these two cases, we consider the political entanglements of investments and involvements in algorithmic interventions as a deeply complex process that warrants further attention. These two specific programs prompt us to question: Can, and will, noncommercially lucrative applications of AI and AI research be funded by these donations from benefactors who serve to profit from the commercial application of AI? Can and will noncommercial and more restorative and redistributive AI applications be prioritized, and in what ways? Moreover, what does it mean that the search for fairer, unbiased, and more ethical algorithms—ones that are not shaped by, and do not reproduce, social inequality—is largely bankrolled by capital investments from a rm that is profiting off of such inequalities in power and capital? Why is it also important to consider how those in charge of shaping, advising, and effecting fairness interventions through AI are skewed toward whiteness, wealth, and uncritical readings of technology’s impact? 
Overview of Corporate AI Interventions
In its co-optation of critical discourse regarding AI’s impacts and in an attempt to further exploit communities for its capital gains, technology giant Google announced in 2019 an ethics advisory council, the Advanced Technology External Advisory Council that would oversee the company’s AI product development. The council was formed by Google CEO Sundar Pichai in an effort to follow new company principles that emerged from the outrage and boycott organized by Google employees against the company’s involvement in using its machine learning algorithms and AI to bolster the Pentagon’s drone technology program, better known as Project Maven. The effort to respond to the crisis of discrimination (both racial and gendered) and the failure to see ethics and justice at Google came on the heels of a walkout organized by women at Google who refused to further contend with sexual harassment, undercompensation compared to male co-workers, and a culture of that consistently undervalues and demeans women, as noted by Marie Hicks, historian of women and technology. By the time the Google ethics council was formed, it included Kay Coles James, president of the Heritage Foundation, which brought about more “techlash” in the form of a call to disband the council or remove James immediately. A week later, the council was canceled due to growing public outcry about its lack of diverse representation and expertise on issues of justice and technology and for its inclusion of specific actors like James with her openly expressed xenophobic, anti-immigrant, anti-LGBTQ, and transphobic views. 
In response to the critiques of the initiative, Google issued a statement that it was “going back to the drawing board.” However, this case serves as another example of the logics of capital, whereby the accumulation strategies of multinational companies largely incorporate and engulf criticism in order to frame the debates and then forestall the interventions that would require different distributions of resources and power to create more just engagements. Moreover, Google’s ability to respond to, and consider, critiques of its hegemonic power structures are further questioned in light of its punishment of activists and organizers from within the company. Specifically, in early 2019, Google employees staged a walkout in response to the growing evidence of mismanagement of personnel issues, particularly in relation to the aforementioned allegations of sexual harassment and a company culture of gender and racial discrimination. In May 2019, AI ethics researcher Meredith Whittaker and fellow Google employee Claire Stapleton, two of the female leaders of these strikes, publicly stated that their supervisors and other Google leaders had coerced and pressured them with various tactics, as attempts to penalize them for organizing the strikes. 
Our final case study is that from 2019 when the National Science Foundation announced a collaborative project with Amazon, Inc., wherein the two parties would “jointly support computational research focused on fairness in AI, with the goal of contributing to trustworthy AI systems that are readily accepted and deployed to tackle grand challenges facing society.” Like other corporate projects attempting to engage with ethics frameworks, this project largely imports language and details about the potential risks and harms of artificial intelligence systems in everyday life while deploying notions of the need for “fair” algorithms to skirt away from larger, more structural and historical issues of inequality which have been accelerated and amplified by these systems. In addition, in return for their investments in research, Amazon claimed proprietary rights to any innovation derived from the federally funded research grants. In essence, the academic-corporate research partnership raised questions about the potential for conflicts of interest, and the role of state-sanctioned taxpayer funds working to underwrite AI and fairness research that would be applied in the context of bolstering Amazon’s business imperatives.
While these four examples demonstrate the contradictions of AI ethics when these projects “will always look for ways to argue for the continued existence, development, and application of AI,” as Alkhatib writes, these cases also collectively illustrate the more systematic and structural ways in which capitalism and their technological corporate embodiments have co-opted the critical discourse about technology’s impacts and biases in search of commercial solutions and proprietary research that serve to protect the continued profits of technology corporations, particularly in light of a potential AI winter ushered in by public skepticism and scrutiny toward AI. That is, while entertaining and leveraging the key terms of critiques against artificial intelligence (e.g., algorithmic “bias” and inequality), there remains little to no deep engagement within extant and emerging high-prole AI interventions to more profoundly, deeply, and adeptly interrogate the power structures and issues that undergird these critical narratives about AI’s harms and risks. In pursuit of fairness and ethics, visions of justice and equity undergirding the original critiques of AI have become techwashed, that is, overly techno-centric, techno-deterministic, and rooted and bankrolled by neoliberal logics of corporate solutionism while obfuscating the systemic causes of such problems.
Synthesizing and Summarizing the State of AI Fairness
In summary, in considering the explosive growth, emergence of, and investment in high-prole AI fairness and ethics interventions within both the academy and industry, alongside the mounting and proliferating calls for the interrogation, regulation, and in some cases, dismantling and prohibition of AI, we contest and question the extent to which such remedies can address the original concerns and problems they are designed to address. Indeed, many community organizations are organizing responses and challenging AI used in predictive technologies, facial recognition software, and biometrics technologies with increasing success. 
Furthermore, we suggest the canon of AI ethics must interrogate and deeply engage with intersectional power structures that work to further consolidate capital in the hands of technocratic elites, and that will undergird digital informational systems of inequality: there is no neutral or objective state through which the flows and mechanics of data can be articulated as unbiased or fair. It is the deployment of digital technologies and their impact that is the more interesting—and important—area of inquiry facing those who might take up the issues of disparity and oppression. Simply striving for fairness in the face of these systems of power does little to address the ways that digital technologies are increasingly central to other forms of structural power. Few of these projects ask whether AI projects should be developed at all, and to what degree there should be public oversight, and which institutions or individuals should be responsible for such oversight. Moreover, the questions about how ethics are framed, as a matter of systemic injustice in the context of historical reckonings with oppression, are rarely a leading research framework or goal. 
In essence, the future of AI and ethics should be concerned with rising global social and economic inequality, the repercussions that will emerge as an effect of climate change, and the ways in which AI will be used in the redistribution of global goods and services—from housing, to food, to border-crossing, and beyond. Broadly, those of us in the elds of digital social research must center the issues of social, political, and economic inequality as an orientation to studying lived experiences in relation to structures of power that algorithms, AI, and automated systems can overdetermine—rather than assuming that technology itself can be ethically perfected or that bias is a feature of a AI or externality that can be corrected or resolved.

